Create Testing chapter (#73)
r-devel/rdevguide: 08-testing_in_R.Rmd

# Testing in R {#TestR}

This chapter discusses about writing tests for R and extending the test suite for R. Usually, when one contributes a patch, one might also want to contribute tests that are able to cover the new code.

## When and why to write a test?

Whenever you add new functionality to the core code or any of the packages distributed with R, it is beneficial to add test(s) corresponding to the new code. While doing so it is essential to check whether `make test-Specific` still works with the new code included. In particular, check whether `cd tests; make no-segfault.Rout` work on a standalone computer without the requirement of an interactive user intervention.

If the new code requires GUI interaction or accesses the Internet, then it is essential to add its name to the `stop list` in `tests/no-segfault.Rin`.

## Writing tests for R

> Writing tests for R is much like writing tests for your own code. Tests need to be thorough, fast, isolated, consistently repeatable, and as simple as possible. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing tests for R is much like writing tests for your own code. Tests need to be thorough, fast, isolated, consistently repeatable, and as simple as possible. When you are adding tests to an existing test file, it is also recommended that you study the other tests in that file; it will teach you which precautions you have to take to make your tests robust and portable. 
```

Tests live in the [`tests` directory of the R sources](https://svn.r-project.org/R/trunk/tests/).

> 

Reviewer: We could also add in an example of a `stopifnot()` test as suggested in https://github.com/r-devel/rdevguide/issues/28#issuecomment-1104532710. There may be a simpler one we can find.

The comparison between the existing file and that generated newly is in the end user\’s locale, hence, the target output files should be ASCII, if at all possible. To specify tests in a non-standard location, the command line option `--test-dir=foo` may be used. For example, unusually slow tests could be placed in `inst/slowTests` and can be run using `R CMD check --test-dir=inst/slowTests`. Similarly tests that require Oracle to be installed could be placed in `inst/testWithOracle`, tests which use random values and may occasionally fail by chance could be placed in `inst/randomTests`, etc..

While performing these checks, the code in package vignettes is also executed, and the vignette PDFs re-made from their sources as a check of completeness of the sources, unless the `BuildVignettes` field in the package’s `DESCRIPTION` file has a false value. If there is a target output file `.Rout.save` in the vignette source directory, the output from running the code in that vignette is compared with the target output file and any differences are reported, but not recorded in the log file. 

## Testing practices

> One must be careful of what their tests (and examples) actually test. Some bad practice seen in distributed packages include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tests for R should follow the general good practice documented in the [Writing R Extensions](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-devel/R-exts.html) manual. In particular:
```

> - Testing the time taken by a command is not reasonable. This is because, one cannot know how fast or how heavily loaded an R platform might be. At best one can test a ratio of times, however even that is difficulty and not advisable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Testing the time taken by a command is not reasonable. This is because, one cannot know how fast or how heavily loaded an R platform might be. At best one can test a ratio of times, however even that is difficult and not advisable.
```

> - The exact format of R messages (from R itself or from other packages) change and can be translated. Hence, it is not a good idea to test their exact format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The exact format of messages from R or from add-on packages can change and may be translated. Hence, it is not a good idea to test their exact format.
```

## Test files

Most tests in base R are `.R` files with R code implementing one of two types of test:

1. Tests that produce an error on failure. These often involve a call to `stopifnot()`.
2. Tests that produce output that is compared to reference output.

If a test file `.R` includes tests that produce output for comparison, running the tests will create an `.Rout` file that should be compared to an `.Rout.save` file with the same name. The tests are usually run as part of the check commands `make check` (for a basic check of R) and `make check-all` or `make check-devel` (for a thorough check with/without the recommended packages). Alternatively you can run a test file directly, for example if you have set the environment variable `TOP_SRCDIR` as the path for the top source directory:

```sh
cd $TOP_SRCDIR/tests
R CMD BATCH reg-tests-3.R
```

> will run `reg-tests-3.R` and create `reg-tests-3.Rout` in the same directory. If you have added a test or made a change that means you need to updated the reference output you can create or overwrite the reference output with, e.g. 

Author: ```suggestion
will run `reg-tests-3.R` and create `reg-tests-3.Rout` in the same directory. If you have added a test or made a change that means you need to update the reference output. You can create or overwrite the reference output with, e.g. 
```
